feat: yellow paper cross-chain communication (#3477)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: yellow-paper/docs/contracts/main.md

        - not be in the future
    - The version MUST be the same as the current version
    - The chainId MUST be the same as the current chainId
- Compute the "ending" state of the block (the state after the block is applied)
- Compute a single public inputs hash from the block content
    - - **Circuit:** MUST match the computation of the circuit
- Validate the proof
- Update state root to the ending state
- Consume the L1 to L2 messages specified in the block from the inbox
    - **Circuit:** The proof MUST only be valid if it inserted these messages into the L2 outbox
- Insert the L2 to L1 messages specified in the block to the outbox
    - **Circuit:** The proof MUST only be valid if it consumed these messages from the L2 inbox

:::info
- We compute a single hash since each public input increase costs of the proof verification.
- Time constraints might change depending on the exact sequencer selection mechanism.
:::

## Portals - Linking L1 and L2

When deploying a contract on L2, it is possible to specify its "portal" address. This is an immutable variable, that can be used to constrain who the L2 contract expect messages from, and who it sends to.

> In the current implementation, any messages that are sent from the L2 contract to L1 MUST be sent to the portal address. This was to get around the access control issue of private execution. This is enforced in the kernel.

Author: It was more to point that in the current paradigm that is the case. Both in implementation and in peoples minds. But guess I should just say paradigm instead in that case 🤷

Must keep track of current and historical addresses of the contracts. 

## State transitioner
The state transitioner is the contract that handles the state and perform the state transition on L1. It makes sure that the proof is valid and that L1 is updated accordingly. It is the main component of our fully validating light node.

Whenever a block is received it is to:
- Compute the "starting" state of the block (the state before the block is applied)
- Check that the starting state is the same as the current state
- Check the global variables provided (block number, timestamp, version, chainId)
    - The block number MUST be the next block number
    - The timestamp MUST:
        - be newer than the previous block inclusion
        - not be in the future
    - The version MUST be the same as the current version
    - The chainId MUST be the same as the current chainId
- Compute the "ending" state of the block (the state after the block is applied)
- Compute a single public inputs hash from the block content
    - - **Circuit:** MUST match the computation of the circuit
- Validate the proof
- Update state root to the ending state

> - Consume the L1 to L2 messages specified in the block from the inbox

Reviewer: since an Inbox can be for multiple versions do we add:
`Consume the L1 to L2 messages specified in the block from the inbox for the particular version`

Author: If the inbox is for multiple version, there is not an inbox for a particular version, its shared. There is just a specific recipient rollup.

Since message from L1 to L2 can be inserted independently of the L2 block, the message transfer (insert into inbox move to outbox) are not synchronous as it is for L2 to L1. This means that the message can be inserted into the inbox, but not yet moved to the outbox. The message will then be moved to the outbox when the state transitioner is consuming the message as part of a block. Since the sequencers are responsible for the ordering of the messages, there is not a known time for this pickup to happen, it async. 

This is done to ensure that the messages are not used to DOS the state transitioner. If the state transitioner was forced to pick up the messages in a specific order or at a fixed rate, it could be used to DOS the state transitioner by inserting a message just before a rollup goes through. 
While this can be addressed by having a queue of messages and let the sequencer specify the order, this require extra logic and might be difficult to price correctly. To keep this out of protocol, we simply allow the user to attach a fee to the message (see `fee` in `L1ToL2Msg` above). This way, the user can incentivize the sequencer to pick up the message faster.

> Since it is possible to land in a case where the sequencer will never pick up the message (e.g., if it is underpriced), the sender must be able to cancel the message. To ensure that this cancellation cannot happen under the feet of the sequencer we use a `deadline`, only after the deadline can it be cancelled. 

Reviewer: inbox must check that deadline > block.timestamp

Author: Should be contained by the new section `Validity Conditions`

> The contract that sent the message must itself decide how it is to handle the cancellation. It could be that the contract simply ignores the message, or it could be that it refunds the user. This is up to the contract to decide. 

Reviewer: Although the inbox contract must still implement a cancel Message method that checks that message.deadline has been achieved and that the cancellation request is coming from `message.sender` and this would remove the message for the entries

:::info Error handling
While we have ensured that the message either arrives to the L2 outbox or is cancelled, we have not ensured that the message is consumed by the L2 contract. This is up to the L2 contract to handle. If the L2 contract does not handle the message, it will be stuck in the outbox forever. Similarly, it is up to the L1 contract to handle the cancellation. If the L1 contract does not handle the cancellation, the user might have a message that is pending forever. Error handling is entirely on the contract developer.
:::

##### L2 Inbox
While the L2 inbox is not a real contract, it is a logical contract that apply mutations to the data similar to the L1 inbox to ensure that the sender cannot fake his position. This logic is handled by the kernel and rollup circuits.

> As for the L1 variant, we must populate the some fields:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just like the L1 variant, we must populate the some fields:
```

- `L2Actor.actor`: The sender of the message (the caller) [also in L1 inbox]
- `L2Actor.version`: The version of the L2 chain sending the message [also in L1 inbox]
- `L1Actor.actor` The recipient of the message (the portal)
- `L1Actor.chainId` The chainId of the L1 chain receiving the message

In practice, this is done at the kernel layer of the L2, and the message hash is a public output of the circuit that is inserted into the L1 outbox for later consumption.

:::warning Comment for discussion
Note that while we are letting the inbox populate more values that what we did for the L1 inbox. This is more an opinionated decision than a purely technical one. 

We could let the contract itself populated the `L1Actor` like we did for L1, but we decided to let the kernel do it instead, since access control can be quite tedious to get right in private execution. By having the `portal` contract that is specified at the time of deployment, we can insert this value and ensure that it is controlled by the contract.

> If we have a better alternative for access control (e.g., slow updates), this could be changed to be more similar to the L1 inbox, which gives better flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we have a better alternative for access control, this could be changed to be more similar to the L1 inbox, which gives better flexibility.
```

:::

### Outbox
The outboxes are the location where a user can consume messages from. An outbox can only contain elements that have previously been removed from an inbox. 

> Our L1 outbox is pretty simple, as the L1 inbox it is a multi-set, where the messages are inserted by the state transitioner, the recipient can consume it (removing it from the outbox).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our L1 outbox is pretty simple. Like the L1 inbox, it is a multi-set. It should allow the state transitioner to insert messages into the multi set and only allow the recipient of the message to consume it (i.e. remove it from the outbox).

Messages can only be consumed if the recipient is on the right chain ID
```

:::info Checking sender
When consuming a message on L1, the portal contract must check that it was sent from the expected contract. Since it is possible for multiple contracts on L2 to send to it, it could go horrible wrong if this is not done.
:::

#### L2 Outbox

> The L2 outbox is quite different. It is merely a merkle tree that is populated with the messages moved by the state transitioner. As mentioned earlier, the messages are consumed by emitting a nullifier from the application circuit. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The L2 outbox is quite different. It is a merkle tree that is populated with the messages added by the state transitioner. As mentioned earlier, the messages are consumed on L2 by emitting a nullifier from the application circuit. 
```

> This means that all validation is done by the application circuit. The application should:

Reviewer: doesn't the application also check if the version is correct?

Author: It should, have added it more explicitly in my checklist for validity conditions

                P2->>O2: Consume msg
                O2->>O2: Validate msg
                O2->>O2: Update state (nullify)
            end

            loop msg in tx.l2ToL1Msgs
                P2->>I2: Add msg
                I2->>I2: Populate msg values
                I2->>I2: Update state (insert)
            end
        end

        loop msg in L2 inbox 
            R2->>O2: Consume msg
            O2->>O2: Update state (delete)
        end

        loop msg in l1ToL2Msgs 
            R2->>O2: Insert msg
            O2->>O2: Update state (insert)
        end

        R2->>R: Block (Proof + Data)

        R->>R: Verify proof
        R->>R: Update State 

        R->>Reg: Where is the Inbox?
        Reg->>R: Here is the address

        R->>I: Consume l1ToL2Msgs from L1
        I->>I: Update state (delete)

        R->>Reg: Where is the Outbox?
        Reg->>R: Here is the address

        R->>O: Insert Messages from L2
        O->>O: Update state (insert)

    end

    P->>O: Consume a msg
    O->>O: Validate msg
    O->>O: Update state (delete)
```
We will walk briefly through the steps of the diagram above.

1. A portal contracts on L1 want to send a message for L2

> 1. The inbox populates the message with `sender` information

Reviewer: and checks the deadline is appropriate and content of the message is 254 bits

1. The inbox contract inserts the message into its storage

> 1. On the L2, as part of a rollup, a transaction tries to consume a message from the L2 outbox.

Reviewer: (if the deadline hasn't passed). The transaction may sort all the messages based on fees attached to them

> 1. The outbox ensures that the message is included, and that the caller is the recipient and knows the secret to spend. (This is practically done by the application circuit)

Reviewer: the application does this and not the outbox right?

Author: Yes, that is why it is practically done by the application circuit and only logically in the outbox.

> 1. The outbox ensures that the message is included, and that the caller is the recipient and knows the secret to spend. (This is practically done by the application circuit)

Reviewer: I noticed we don't talk about creating a L1 to L2 merkle tree explicitly anywhere. Is that intentional?

1. The nullifier of the message is emitted to privately spend the message (This is practically done by the application circuit)

> 1. As part of the transaction, the contract wish to send a message to L1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The L2 contract now wishes to send a message to L1
```

> 1. The inbox populates the message with `sender` and `recipient` information

Reviewer: can we add "l2" here as in "the l2 inbox...." 
same for the subsequent sentences to avoid confusion

1. The outbox updates it local state by inserting the messages
1. The portal later consumes the message from the L1 outbox
1. The outbox validates that the message exists and that the caller is the recipient
1. The outbox updates it local state by deleting the message

:::info L2 inbox is not real
As should be clear from above, the L1 inbox don't need to exist for itself, it keeps no state between blocks, as every message created in the block will also be consumed in the same block. 
:::

## Future work
- Sequencer selection contract(s)
    - Relies on the sequencer selection scheme being more explicitly defined
    - Relies on being able to validate the sequencer selection scheme 
- Improve public inputs hash computation
    - Currently it is using calldata and blocks to be passed along with the proof, but it should be adapted to better allow other DA layers.
    - Modularize the computation such that the state transitioner need not know the exact computation but merely use a separate contract as an oracle.
- Governance/upgrade contract(s)
    - Relies on the governance/upgrade scheme being more explicitly defined

> - Explorer getting rid of the specific 1:M relationship between L1 and L2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Explore getting rid of the specific 1:M relationship between L1 and L2
```
